Welcome to the Empirical Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Kolie Moore, joined as always by my co-host, Kyle Helson. I want to thank everybody for listening as always. I want to ask that you subscribe to the podcast. Well, you've probably done that. So share the podcast. That's great. That's the best thing you can do if you want to help the podcast. Also give us a five-star iTunes rating if you would be so kind. And remember that we're also ad-free, so if you'd like to support the podcast by donating to our equipment needs and the hosting fees and all that kind of stuff, you can do so at empiricalcycling.com slash donate. We have some show notes.
up in the website. We may or may not link to a couple things. And if you have any coaching and consultation inquiries, questions and comments, you can email me directly at empiricalcycling at gmail.com. Also, don't forget on Instagram at empiricalcycling. Check us out if you want to participate in the AMAs. This is probably going to go out on the, what is today, November 9th. So it's probably go out on the 9th or 10th. And I'll probably be doing an AMA on the 11th from the gym and then on the weekends as always.
Come on over, check that out, and just watch and read, or, you know, send heckling questions like Kyle does Hey, you're giving away all the secrets Alright, you are not the only person who sends me heckling questions Good, good Oh god, what was the chicken slapping one that Chris sent me?
I found a gif of a penguin slapping something and then I put a gif of a rolling chicken on top of it so it looked like the penguin was slapping the chicken to roll it at the same time Something about like fat oxidation or something like when slapping a chicken to cook it Oh yeah, kilojoule burn or something I don't know, it takes a lot of kilojoules to cook a chicken Anyway, so nominally today we were supposed to already be talking about but we will get to in a second
Strength Training. So this is probably the most common thing I get asked other than what should I do. Most people kind of have a sense of what should I do. We talked about that last episode. We kind of came up with a heavy bilateral lift.
that goes to full range of motion like a squat or a leg press or something like that and a heavy unilateral lift, single leg squat, Bulgarian squat, single leg press, that kind of stuff. So how do we do sets and reps? Kyle, I know you've given quite a lot of advice to people lately on this kind of thing. So why don't you kind of start where you have started with your friends who have asked you? Definitely recommend you do heavy 20s rep squats. I'm kidding.
So, if you are a completely new strength trainer, you'll go online and you'll see lots of workouts and try to maybe crib notes off of an existing program from some other sport or maybe like a more bodybuilding style routine or something like that. But a lot of times you see them periodized in a way to put more emphasis on hypertrophy first and then moving into strength and then if it's a traditional
um like strength sport borrowed workout program then it will move into like peak strength like one rep max like powerlifting olympic weightlifting stuff like that but for a lot of cyclists they should probably ask themselves is spending however many weeks keep in mind that they are not probably going to be lifting a lot
During the regular season, because lifting is not their sport, is spending a bunch of weeks on hypertrophy the best use of their time? And if it isn't, then maybe spend more time working on just the strength aspect, like the base strength, not one rep max, like as much fun as one rep maxes are. It doesn't really matter for cycling.
and then so if you ask the question of what what are the kind of basal set and rep prescriptions for basic strength I usually like to tell people the analogy of if we said two by 20 is like a bread and butter this is your FTP workout where it won't be the best FTP workout all the time but most of the time it's probably going to give you pretty good results if you're consistent and keep doing it and for strength work
that usually comes in the form of something like three sets of four to six reps. Yeah, three by five and five by five are probably two loading seams that almost everybody who has Googled this has heard of. Yeah, and those are great places to start, certainly.
It might be a little intimidating because you might be thinking like, oh man, the last time I went to the gym, I was doing something more like 8, 10, 12 reps, something like that. So all of a sudden five, like, like you might be thinking, oh, well, is it just going to be, am I just doing fewer reps with the same lighter weight? Like, no, you're, you have to bump up the, the load accordingly. And so you may find that this puts you.
doing a much higher percentage of your one rep max or of what you think is like, oh, that's actually kind of a lot of weight. And traditionally, that typically ends up around for like, that's a five in the 80, 85-ish percent of one rep max range, if you know what your one rep max is. Yeah. So why don't we take a step back for a second and let's think about two core principles here is the percentage of one rep max thing. And also like the fact that, well, let's just get out of the way because we don't have to spend much time on this.
It's going to be that when you are doing strength training, the given is that you're getting close to failure. Not that you are getting to failure. Because I think in the first episode of the strength series that we're doing here, we talked about how technique breakdown can be a different type of failure than just not completing the lift fully. And so if you are going to...
When it comes to thinking about getting close to failure, most strength work in terms of RPE, we're not going to talk about the 1-10 thing right now, or even reps in reserve, but just think it's going to be really hard, but you can totally do it. You don't have that moment of like, oh, if I do this next rep, it's going to be dicey. You don't have that moment, but you're like, man, I am working hard.
that's kind of the range that we kind of expect you to be working in with this kind of stuff. Yeah. And I would say if you compare that to more traditional aerobic intervals that you've done on the bike, like if you do two by 20, the last...
two seconds or 10 seconds or a minute or something of that 20-minute interval should not be you hanging on for dear life like you're not going to make it to the end. In theory, yes. In theory, yes, if you've programmed them correctly. So likewise, if you're doing a set of four to six squats, five squats, whatever it may be, you should not be afraid for your life.
It should be hard, but you should not be afraid for your life at the end of every one. Yeah, you should not be worried about getting pinned by the bar and like hitting the bottom of your squat and going, oh shit, I forgot to put the safety arms up. You do not want to have that moment because you are going to get pinned to the ground and probably, well, end up on gym fails. And everybody who reached out to me and said, I spend an hour on gym fails just scrolling through, I have done that too. Yeah.
Anyway, so the other thing, one rep max. So, Kyle, I think I've had you one rep max your deadlift maybe two or three times by now, and I don't think I've ever asked you to one rep max your squat, have I? I think I've asked you a nine out of ten single on a squat. Yeah, definitely. And I've definitely...
Taken that and then gone up and attempted a weight and then failed. So, you know, adherence to workout somewhere and then 8 out of 10 range in that situation. But no, I, yeah, very rarely will I like go to the gym and like spend the entire time, like 30, 40 minutes of the first.
Part of the time in the gym, just like warming up real easy and then just taking heavy singles up and up and up and up to try to actually truly max out like you would if you were, I don't know, on the football team again in high school or something. Yeah. So like, cause you're a, I mean, the reason I bring this up, cause you're a sprinter and lifting is your bread and butter. And so, you know, if you're not going to max out a squat.
I think it goes without saying that a normal endurance athlete should in no way be attempting to max out their squat, right? Yes. And I think as much fun as it might be for some people and as curious as it might be, right? Because you want to do an FTP test. You want to see how much you can squat. Like if you don't have really strong technique and also are very comfortable actually failing a lift, then it may not be worth the
extra risk associated. Like literally there are Olympic weightlifters, like people who can clean and jerk more than I can squat, who don't actually take true one rep max attempts because it's just not worth it because they are that strong. Like it's just not worth the risk. They can already squat 10 or 20% more than they can clean and jerk. So that's all that matters.
Yeah, you've got that headroom. And you can see strength progression easily by going, oh, I'm lifting this much weight, you know, to the same depth that I had been, and I can do more reps. Therefore, I am stronger, full stop. Like, that's it. You are stronger. Yeah, yeah. You don't need to prove it. Yeah. Like, the one rep max attempt. You've already proven it by doing more reps or more sets or both. Yeah. And I think the other thing is that...
Like a lot of cyclists who think about maybe I should go try to one rep max my squat. Like first of all, if you have not done a ton of squatting, and I mean a ton, like I've been squatting for years and even I'm still going, oh, my technique, I need to like tweak this a little bit. Like if you don't have everything down, including like stepping out from the rack, you know, you don't get to like step out.
two, three steps, kind of adjust yourself, you know, make sure the bar is right on your shoulders. Like when you've got a one rep max load on your shoulders, you step out and you go, I better get this over with quick. This is going to be really dicey. Like it's stressful, like mentally to do that. For sure. And you also, as you get to heavier weights, you may find that, especially if you lift at a commercial gym and they don't have the highest quality, like highest tensile strength.
Barbells, you may actually find that they bend and they flex more. And so you may step out your normal like two steps out of the rack and the bar starts moving on you. And then you've got to wait a few seconds for it to stop moving. And you're like, that's more time that you are standing under this thing being like, I really wish I didn't actually have this on my back. But like, here we go. Ready? Yeah. Yeah. And that's a nervous moment. And that wobble.
Like it's, it's weird the first time you feel it. Um, and you know, like, especially like, you know, if you've got the mirror in front of the squat rack, which, uh, I actually recommend so that way you can, you can always make sure you're maintaining depth. Uh, that's how I do it, you know? Cause some people like, if you've got like, you know, the West side, um, uh, spacing for, um, for the racks.
Yeah, the one-inch hole. Yeah, the one-inch holes. Yeah, my old rack had that, and it was great because I could set it to just the right depth, and I could tap the bar, and okay, now I've completed a full squat if that's something that I want to work on. So standardizing your depth is really key. Anyway, so this kind of rolls into...
super heavy sets. I kind of want to break this down the typical way you might see strength training broken down in terms of rep ranges. So the one to three rep range, taken or given that this is going to be pretty close to failure, this is a dicey area for a lot of endurance athletes. It's also a dicey area for even experienced strength athletes like you and me.
And it can even be a dicey area for very experienced strength athletes. Like maybe football players, joints aren't doing so good anymore. You've been through a couple injuries. Maybe you've got like two fused vertebrae in your spine or something like that. Oh, God. Like, I mean, just look at Ronnie Coleman. Like, he's a mess right now.
But, you know, I mean, that's what it takes to be the GOAT and, you know, lifting insane weights like he did. But that's one of the things where, you know, you see, like, really, really experienced lifters like him. If they're going to go into the gym, they want the same stimulus. They're going to go down in the weight. Just, you know, less wear and tear on the joints, less, you know, less of all that kind of stuff. And you can get more or less same stimulus. But we're getting ahead of ourselves. Not to mention, if you, yeah, connective tissues.
They recover much slower than your muscles do because they get so much less blood flow. So if you do feel like, oh, my knee tendonitis is really acting up, taking a heavy one rep max is maybe not good for it. I guarantee it's not good for it. Yeah, and so the one to three rep max, or not rep max, just the one to three rep range, three reps you'd be in like 90 plus percent of your one rep max.
High 80s, low 90s, something like that. It's rough because it's very much like a one rep max attempt in that it's a lot of load. I think if I unracked my potential one rep max on the squat right now, my whole core would go, oh, this is new. Okay, can you put it back now before I even step back?
For sure, and that's why powerlifters taper down in there and taper down the number of reps and increase the weight accordingly.
Go straight from sets of 10 or sets of 5 and then the next week start doing heavy singles, right? They go sets of 5 and then sets of 4 and then down to 3 and then heavy doubles and then they go to a meet and try to do a heavy single. It's not like they were just doing, you know, 10 by 10 like German volume training, bro. Like now we're going to go try to do one rep maxes. They train, get that nervous system training and all the other systemic
you know, support that you need to actually do heavy loads. Yeah. And I think that's, that's the key takeaway here is that at least to me and, you know, to you as well, um, uh, you know, training in the one to three rep range, you know, close to failure. This is a sports specific rep range as in you are doing powerlifting or weightlifting or
I don't know, CrossFit maybe. Strongman. Strongman, definitely. You are doing these types of things. That's what this rep range is for. We can get, you know, when it comes to like actually building strength, you know, it's not even that good at building strength. It's like, okay, at building strength, it's better for building that really heavy weight specificity, you know? Yeah. Yeah.
It's also really mentally taxing. I think we haven't, like, in addition to being just systemically fatiguing, like, if you're not psyched up and, like, ready to go for a one rep max, you're just going to get pinned. Like, you know, because you, and we've talked about this before too, right? Like, you literally have to have your brain be focused enough to tell your muscles to contract as hard as possible. Or...
Or your baby is going to be pinned under that broken car or something like that. It's got to be that kind of moment, that kind of strength. Yeah, so this brings us to a more practical rep range, which is the four to six.
Rep Range. Now, this rep range is actually pretty great. So when you look at programs like Starting Strength and stuff like that, it's sets of five. And this is what I would usually give somebody who is starting out fairly strong and has done some lifting, and we want to get kind of right into the kind of strength neural adaptation phase.
Longer sets, which we'll talk about in a second, I find are actually best to begin with for most athletes. But when I got into the gym at first, I did sets of five, and that was fine. I needed a lot of warm-up sets because my technique was crap when I was starting. I remember literally my very first set of squats, I was on my toes, only my toes at the bottom of my squat for like 135. And I was like,
I remember something about my feet being flat on the floor. I think I did this wrong and my quads were really sore. Then I went back and I fixed it. But I did not do it right that day. So anyway, so for strength improvements, sets of four to six. Kyle, what say you? Yeah, I think the other thing is sets of four to six are not so long that you, if you don't have the best technique, it's not like...
you run a lower risk of extreme technique breakdown because you're not pumping out a set of 22 or whatever where like instead of your quads and your glutes getting sore it starts becoming your abs or your back or oh maybe your wrist hurts a little bit so holding that squat like that kind of irritates your wrist or your elbow but not initially but once you have to do a set of 20 or something like that it gets to be a problem. Yeah and so sets of
Sets of four to six I think are great for a couple scenarios. First, if you're already kind of strong and you've already got some technique in you, you get up to working ranges of like five.
Six, this is going to be good for you. And if you want to find a lot of strength immediately and you know your technique is okay, this is where to start after your adaptation phase. We'll talk about periodization probably in the next podcast. We'll probably touch on it a little bit, kind of like this. Anyway, so this is...
This is a good place to be also if you've just completed a hypertrophy phase. Let's say you're a bodybuilder and you've been doing sets of 10 to 30 all the time. You've got a ton of muscle mass. If you have all that muscle mass and then you start trying to create maximal force with strength-stimulating rep ranges, your strength is going to go right through the roof.
I would say also, you mentioned on something like your adaptation phase, like even if you are pretty strong, like don't feel bad if you take a couple weeks or whatever to get back into lifting and don't dive in straight into three by fives or whatever, because you will be very sore. You'll be less sore if you don't dive just straight back into heavy fives. Yeah, for sure. Yeah. And I think this is something that you and I both do as well.
I like I probably mentioned before I had a couple months out of the gym then I got back in I took probably two or three weeks of just
just getting the technique back. I could barely do a single at 225 my first time back. I know that's a lot of weight for the average person, but for an average team sports athlete, that's okay. It's pretty good. I think team sport, one rep max in the squat, it's usually somewhere in the mid 200s to the low 300s. Kyle, for you and me, or actually just for me, you're a lot stronger than I am, I'm an average team sport.
Strength level. And so I think that's the right context to say that like I need that adaptation period too of just getting in, making sure that I don't feel like my quads are going to rip off my knees. So after sets of three to six, we have the mid range here. Now this is a range of, I typically will say like sets of like seven or eight up to
but realistically you could probably go as high as 15 now yeah go ahead sorry and this is probably a fairly common range for people who have done any kind of just you know you go to the gym with your buddies or whatever and you just try doing stuff and people oh you're doing like sets of like 8 to 12 and that's I think tends to be a pretty common bodybuilding range just because you still do get in higher loads it's not as high as sets of 5 or sets of 2 or whatever but
At sets of 8 to 10, the weight is lower that it's not as mentally taxing as super, super heavy loads. We'll say sets of 5 or fewer. Yeah, so sets of like 8 to 12, 8 to 15, let's say, is actually a good rep range for adaptation phase. So when you just get into the gym, doing light weights.
sets of 8 to 12. Doesn't matter if you're close to fatigue when you're doing the adaptation phase, by the way. You're going to be sore no matter what, then you'll get less sore. And as you get less sore and you're feeling a little more confident with higher weights and your technique, then you can get back to it. So when it comes to being a little closer to failure for this mid-range of reps, the 8 to 12-ish,
I find that it's, first of all, it's great, great, great for technique learning. So if you're newer in the gym, like a lot of my people who are, you know, haven't been into the gym for years or like they're pretty new to the gym, this is the rep range that I have them work in the most. And we'll stay in this phase of doing like 8 to 12 for longer than I might usually keep a person just for the technique. And it's also not long enough that you're
that you're – what do you call it? The fatigue of maintaining the technique like your abs, your shoulders. The systemic fatigue doesn't get too high. Yeah, the systemic fatigue and the stabilizing muscles, like they don't get too tired. Like this is a decent rep range for them. Even though you might feel like, oh, my technique is breaking down. Time to stop. Move on. Fight another day. That's not to say that even though we said like sets of five or four or six or so are –
are the best for basal strength. That doesn't mean sets of 8 to 12 or 7 to 15 or so aren't good for strength. It's not like you won't develop strength just in the same way that doing sweet spot work doesn't mean that your VO2 max is going to go down or something. These are also a continuum of stimuli just like aerobic intervals are.
Yeah, yeah, for sure. And it's also a continuum of motor unit recruitment. So in this rep range, as you get closer to failure, you can still get into some pretty large motor units and still get some pretty good stimulus there. However, if you go a little too far, like if you go into the true bodybuilder, low weight, high rep ranges of like
like 15 to 30. And you can be down as low as like, I think it's like 30, 40, 40, 30% of one rep max. And as long as you get close to failure, you're going to get a good hypertrophy stimulus. Now, this is a good rep range if you're doing things like delt raises and calf raises. Small muscles, small range of motion. I can cross it out. We're touching on it now.
It's good for that kind of thing where if you're doing calf raises or you're doing bicep curls, add all your masturbation jokes here. Go ahead. We'll edit in a pause for you. So if you're doing these kinds of little less range of motion things, these longer rep ranges are probably going to be something you should do. Although, generally speaking, I...
Don't assign this kind of stuff to people for cycling. But if you're going to like, you know, just be doing this for, you know, your own vanity or whatever, you know, I'm not above that. I still do some rows. You know, I also think that, yeah, if that those are things, if you're going to do them, you can attack them onto your workout. Don't put them first because there are like lower weights. Just if you're going to structure a workout, do your hard, heavy, like much more neuro wave attack.
like fatiguing things first and then do your, you know, rack runs with the lateral raises when you're fighting grandma for the fives at the end. So where were we going with this? Oh yeah. So, um, so, so this rep range here, the eight to 12 rep range is also good for hypertrophy. So if you want to build muscle,
and you just want to build muscle and you don't want to build strength. There are a couple of physiological reasons to do that. We'll probably get into a strength series on Wattstock at some point and we'll really get into this. But basically, if you want more anaerobic capacity, building muscle mass is a good way to do it. Like if you want your W prime to go up without your P max going up or something like that, this is...
This is probably the road for you. And so this is a good rep range to work in there also because especially for large range of motion, multi-joint compound movements like squats, if you start trying to squat to 20 reps to failure, it gets dicey at the end with your technique, with the fatigue, with the gray vision. And that's why when you see people do higher rep
quad training. A lot of times, the really high rep, very close to failure stuff are on some sort of machine where you have a lower concern of technique completely ruining you. If you do high rep overhead squats, here's an extreme example to failure, you have a whole world of things to worry about as you start to get sloppy and end up dumping an overhead squat, as opposed to doing it on
Smith machine or a hack squat or a quad, like knee extensions, which is probably the worst because it's all quad burn. Whereas like a knee extension, you know, if you can't do it, you just, you just stop, right? You just like let the weight back down. Yeah, exactly. You don't have any risk of dropping anything. Yeah.
It's funny with knee extensions. Just as an experiment, I knew intellectually it wasn't going to work because the range of motion is too small. Also, I'm only using one joint as opposed to two. Just doing knee extensions, seated knee extensions, heavy doesn't really do much in terms of the one to six rep range. It really doesn't. This is one of those things where you've got to get into the 10 to 20 rep range, but the machine does the stabilizing for you.
It's like a Smith machine. It's like the bar is on a track. Like it's, you're not going to be able to perturb it back and forth unless you really try. And if you succeed, I don't, I want that on gym fails. I please record that. Um, don't do that to your, somebody else's gym. Make sure it's your own Smith machine. Um, next, next comment is gonna be like, I tried this and I got kicked out of planet fitness. Empirical cycling told me to, um, I set off the lunk alarm.
Okay, so yeah, so this is what this rep range is pretty good for. So if you're gonna be, you know, it actually makes it pretty good transition from the adaptation phase to the hypertrophy phase, which is a pretty standard periodization, as you said. You know, if you're gonna work on your technique for sets of 10, then you can, you know, build the weights up a little bit, sets of 10, feeling confident in your technique, feeling good.
and everything's feeling all right. Then you can start adding a little more weight. Maybe you add a little more reps, sets of 12, sets of 15 with whatever you're working with. Let's say it's 100 pounds. Then you go, okay, I'm getting stronger. I can add a little more weight. So now you try 110. You go 12 again. You're like, all right, now I got to add more weight. You go 120, 130. Okay, cool. Now we're getting into sets of eight to 10. All right, great. Now you are building strength for sure. Yeah.
What do we have left? Sets of over 15. We've already kind of touched on this. Yeah, it's fine if you want to do a hypertrophy stuff, for sure. And it's good for small range of motion type muscles, like we said. Calf raises is a really good example of this. But, you know, otherwise I find it to be kind of useless except as like a gimmick.
Isn't there a video of somebody raw squatting some huge weight for 20 and then he did something else? You sent it to me twice, Kyle, I think. What was that? There's this picture of this guy. The video is probably 10 years old at this point. He was a competitive powerlift at the time. I think he's retired. But his workout for the day was a 20-rep max squat, no belt, no knee sleeves, no squat suit or anything like that.
High Bar, I think it was 485. He does 20 reps. And then after that, he does heavy singles. Oh, God. I just want to know why. He still gets heavy singles above 600. I think his second heavy single was like, you know, 280 kilos or something. Yeah. Yeah. Anyway, although...
There is something to be said, I think, for heavy singles for pure sprinters like you and me. Like, it's part of the periodization. But, you know, it would be like a very late part of the periodization where you really want to maximize that unilateral neural drive and stuff like that. Does that kind of make sense? Yeah. Yeah. But, yeah, the 20 rep squats, they're a nice gimmick.
They suck. And would I suggest anyone actually do that? No. Like, they're not fun. Like, it's the closest thing you can do in the gym that's going to feel like a kilo because it's probably going to take you in the neighborhood of a minute because you'll bang for the first 10. You're like, oh, this isn't so bad. And then you're like, oh. Just like the first 30 seconds of a minute effort. Not so bad. Yeah. And then you start doing like 12.
13. Okay. Yeah. And you start taking more and more breaths. It gets longer and longer. It's terrible. Just close your eyes and think of England. It's so bad. And then obviously, unlike a bike where you can just stop pedaling, you may get stapled at some point, which is uncomfortable. Yeah. Yeah. It's hard to get pinned under a weight on your bike unless a tree falls on you, in which case you've got worse problems. Oh, no. Oh, God.
Almost happened to me once actually, me and my friend Dan, we were going down this road in, where were we? I forget, it was like the Wednesday night ride route or something, Glen Road maybe? Oh no, it was like further north. But we hear this sound and we come around a corner, we're blazing down at like 30, 35 miles an hour and there's just a tree across the road and it was startling to us because
I remember a car went by us in the other lane, like, you know, going the other way, like literally five seconds before we came around this turn and saw this tree down. So this tree narrowly missed falling on that car and a little less narrowly missed falling on us. And it was like just clear across the road. It was anyway. Oh, that was a fun memory. Shout out to Dan. What's up, man? So let's talk about sets.
So we've kind of already touched on this, like three to five sets of like a heavy exercise is a good place to start, but what do you want to kind of look at in terms of adding, when do you want to add sets versus when do you want to, like how many sets do you want to do total in a workout? Yeah, I think one thing you have to think about is that it all does build on each other, so if you're going to do
Leg Day, because that's what most cyclists are going to do more often. It's not like after you do that first three sets of five squats at the beginning of the workout, you're already going to be a little tired. So if you try to do single leg squats or leg extensions or hack squats or something afterward, you're already going to be a little bit tired. So the sets and reps that you do
Don't have to be completely easy, but it should also take that into account that if you're going to go in and you think you're going to slam five by five heavy sets for four exercises or something like you're going to have a bad time. Yeah, for sure. And also that you may be able to hack squat 400 pounds for sets of five fresh, right? But how much, but you're not going to be able to do that.
after you've done some heavy front squats or leg extensor or anything beforehand. Like you're going to be a little tired. Yeah, I would guess you could probably do sets of like one to three at your fresh five rep range if you're fatigued. Yeah, yeah. And that's not necessarily a bad thing. Like it is, you know, sometimes you think like, oh, if you compare this to I'm going to do VO2 max intervals, I want to feel rested and feel fresh and when I slam the next one. But like that third one is,
You're still trying as hard as you were the first one, but you're probably going a little bit slower or the power's a little bit lower or something like that. It's okay, just like it is doing intervals and just like it is lifting weights. Yeah, and you've got to be aware of that both neural and muscular fatigue when you periodize these things and when you think about what you're going to do in the gym. So if you're trying to build strength, just like raw strength, you want to make your first...
exercise your heaviest, most important compound set. You don't want to start with knee extensions and then move on to single leg squats and then you move on to heavy squats because I would say that is exactly backwards of what you want to do for this kind of thing. It's sort of like doing a whole bunch of sprints and then a whole bunch of VO2 max efforts, then some capacity stuff, and then you're going to work your threshold? I don't know about that.
If any of you are actually interested in trying to figure out exactly how many sets per week and things like that, if you do look up some of the Renaissance periodization stuff, Mike Isertel has done a couple of videos on average numbers for different muscle groups for what you might be able to actually recover from in a week. If you're doing more than about 10
heavy sets per session for legs, for quads, you're probably going to have a bad time or the sets maybe aren't heavy enough if strength is your goal. Yeah. And if you're thinking about this more in terms of the, well, we should definitely Wattstock this kind of stuff. If you're going to do, I remember when I was coaching at MIT, I remember this one kid in the gym.
He would superset his whole workout. He just would not rest between everything. Like he would do some squats, then he would go over to the trap bar, then he would do this thing, then he would get on the treadmill, and then he would do it all over again. And he would just keep doing it and doing it and doing it and doing it. And at that point, it's like, I mean, if it's training for something specific, okay.
If you're doing something like that for strength, it's not so good. You need to make sure that you take plenty of rest. You need to make sure that you can lift really maximally in order to have a big impact. Because if you're fatigued, either neurally or muscularly, when you go to do a heavy set of five squats, you're going to do not enough.
which is not enough stimulus like we were talking about with sets of like one to three for pure strength stuff it's not quite enough stimulus to either get stronger or grow depending on what your goal is with this kind of thing yeah and so keeping that in mind so if you start off the workout for example with three sets of five that's great so you maybe only have five six more good heavy sets this is not including warm-up sets
in you if you're going to move on to after squats or if you're going to do front squats or single leg squats or hack squats or whatever. So keep that in mind. And yeah, and those numbers of like you can't do more than maybe 10-ish really heavy sets in a workout, that is definitely looking at just the heavy working sets, not your warm-up sets. Yeah, and I've noticed with myself, like I tap out at somewhere around eight.
eight to nine heavy sets in a workout. And that's with like decreasing weights, getting close to failure. And so I, yeah, like maybe four sets of squats, three sets of like single leg stuff, and then like an accessory, something like maybe knee extensions. You know, I'll do two sets of knee extensions and then I will go home and I will want to eat everything in sight and sleep for 10 hours.
One of the things that happens as you train and as you get better at strength training is your ability to recover does get better, same as with endurance training. And that does mean that you can actually increase the sets that you do as long as you are making sure that you can do them in high quality movements and that it's actually giving you the stimulus that you want out of it. There's no sense in, you know...
in adding sets and reps just to do it unless, you know, if you're like, if you're really tired and you're like, oh man, I really want to go home today, but I really need to do this set of like whatever it is, front squats or something. If you want to do that for technique.
I think that's awesome. Do that. Lightweights, after the big stuff is done, it's time for accessory work, work on technique, work on a little, you know, just a little engagement of small muscles or what have you, maybe do some balance work. But it's not the time to do more heavy stuff if you're really cooked. Yeah. I also think that, like you touched on, generally, if you want to improve strength,
If you're generally working at sets of five, you find yourself, you've been doing three sets of five. There's nothing wrong with adding like a fourth set of five. But if you're really going after the strength, typically what's going to be more likely is that if all of a sudden those three sets of five, say instead of doing five, like, oh man, I was able to do six every time. The next time you'd probably bump up the weight a little bit. That could only be 10 pounds. That's fine.
And then if that brings you back down to more like three sets of four or five where the first set you got five and the next set you only got four and then four, that's fine. Next time you try to do three sets of five and actually get the five each time. And likewise, if you are more, maybe a little more interested in hypertrophy, like do you want to get big quads because you have to win an Instagram contest, let's say.
That is the situation where if you're doing three sets of five, maybe you add a fourth set of five or a fifth set of five. And instead of upping that weight, you add a little bit more volume or a lot more volume. Yeah. I mean, that is definitely a way to increase the stimulus. Oh, so actually, we should probably address one more thing, which is loading.
Now, we kind of touched on, you know, percentages of one rep max, but I had said if, you know, it's kind of pointless to test your one rep max, or it's more risk than it's worth for almost everybody. And so, you know, if you want to test a max, by the way, I would say like, go for like, five or six, because you kind of know when you're getting tapped out. But even then, don't do it. Like, that's, that's an
If your technique is really good and you've been lifting a long time and you've maxed out before and you've done it under good supervision, okay. But the average person listening to this, I would tell you to never max out. So how do we... Okay, well, so this is just the way of saying, so how would we determine how much to lift? And so this is one of those things where you need... It's really just kind of a simple...
and Occam's Razor thing. Like you kind of get up to the edge of it and then you don't go over. Like the simplest solution is the best. So if you are just finishing up your hypertrophy phase and you are wondering how many sets or like what weight can I do for sets of five, then you do your normal warmup sets. So if I'm doing sets of 10 as my main thing, I'll probably do sets of 10 warming up.
but if I'm doing sets of five I'll probably do sets of five warming up so I'll give you an example from my last transition to strength phase. I had been repping like 255 or something like that for like 15 or whatever and then I was like oh how much can I do on sets of five?
I went up sets of five up to 255 and then I gauged, I did a set of five. Okay, how much do I have left in the tank? All right, I feel like I can add maybe 20 more pounds because that was pretty easy. So I do another set of five with 20 more pounds. All right, getting harder. How many more pounds do I need to do? Like maybe I do add 10 or 15 more pounds and then do a set of five. Okay, that feels kind of heavy. Do I need to do another set or am I kind of cooked?
kind of cooked. All right, I'm going to move on. And when I come back next time, I'm going to do sets of five, warm up sets up to that last weight I had on the bar. Then I'm going to do three to five sets of five with that. And then I'm going to make another determination of how did that go? Does that make sense? Yeah, I think that's a great description.
Honestly, if you are 100% new to lifting, never lived before, the entire time that you would have just described doing an adaptation phase and maybe some hypertrophy, you can spend figuring out what weights feel appropriate to you. And that's totally fine. Like, obviously, at the beginning, you may start off with an empty bar and you see, you know, how's your technique? How do you feel? And making conservative jumps is fine.
with power targets where typically if you have to do 2x20 or something like that, it's not like you have to nail 271.6 watts or it's not going to come out right. If you erred on the side of a little bit of conservative and you only did 265 for your sets of five and you could have maybe done 275 but you'd be pushing it a little bit and you maybe weren't going to get that fifth rep on that third set, that's fine. It's not like you're
only doing 125 and he should have been doing 265. No, no, no. You came close enough. And so don't be worried that you're not going to nail it exactly. Yeah, for sure. And being a little conservative on these kinds of things is a good way to go. If your benchmark of adding more weight is you're doing five sets of five and you do four sets of, let's say three sets of five, then you do one set of four.
and then you're like, oh, well, I'm kind of recovered. I think I can do another set. You do a set of like three and then you're like, okay, I'm going to call it there. It's not time to add more weight yet. However, if you're like, oh man, I was kind of fatigued and whatever. You've got these other complicating factors and you know that wasn't a good performance out of you and you easily could have done five sets of five. Okay. Add more weight on the bar. And then if it goes badly next time and you only get like three sets of four.
then you know you made a jump too fast and you can just back it off the next time. But it doesn't mean you're wasting workouts. These are still good workouts. These are still good stimuli. But if you have a certain easy benchmark of this is when to add weight, did I hit this benchmark or not?
that is a really good way to do it. So if it's three sets of five, if it's four sets of five, if it's four sets of four, if it's, I would say probably don't go six sets of six, like three sets of six, four sets of six. Yeah, like anywhere in this kind of range, if you start, and also if you have that RPE thing of like, oh, I feel really strong today, I think I can add a little more weight. You know, let's say you're lifting, you know, 200 pounds and you go, I think I can do 210 or 215.
Put 210 on there and do another set and see if that's a good or bad decision. Just know, be honest with yourself. In the middle of your set, which is sometimes hard to do, am I hitting full depth? No? Okay, I gotta stop. Am I fatiguing in any way? Okay, no, gotta stop. Is this muscle tweaking, is my knee tweaking? I should stop. Be conservative is what we're saying. I also think no one...
is going to be judging you. If you enter in these comments later in TrainingPeaks, it's not like the TrainingPeaks website is going to be like, oh, yeah, you thought you were going to do four sets of four at 265, but you only got three sets of four and then one set of three. Like, ah, no, it's fine. Just don't worry about it. The important part is you get a good strength stimulus and you don't tweak something and then end up.
unable to race in six months. Yeah. Yeah. So, yeah. So just remember that we're talking about, you know, as fuller range of motion as you can safely do. And if you can only like safely quarter squat, then probably shouldn't squat. You know, get on the leg press or the hack squat or the Smith machine or whatever you need to do. And you're getting pretty close to failure, but you're not actually getting to failure. If you get to failure at a point,
That is a sign to back it off. I've done that with myself recently. I got to failure the other day at the gym. It was my very last rep of my very last set. I had actually intended to do a little more, but I just didn't because I was lying on the ground and thinking how nice and cool the floor was. And there's actually a picture of that on Instagram, by the way. Perfect. Yeah. Yeah, I would compare that to also like...
Some days on the bike, you got to do some tempo workout or something. And 40 minutes into your 60 minute tempo ride, you're like, this sucks. I feel like crap. I can barely keep this going. Like, it's fine. You know, it's one workout. It's not it's not you sitting at home on the couch for six months and then being confused about why you're not doing why you're not racing well. Right. So it's fine. Yeah. And it's it's one of those things where like.
I saw somebody tweet this recently, and if you saw this also, I sent it to you, Kyle, because we were making fun of it, but also I could see the wisdom of it in some ways too, where this person had said some workouts, like sometimes if you do a particular workout, it can ruin your whole season. And I thought that was silly because we're used to cycling.
where if you go too hard, like, okay, just go home and rest. But like, if you do this with weightlifting, you are going to hurt your back and you are going to have to, you know, you're going to break something. If you do it, you know, if you do it with like, with running, like if you are, have just been doing like, you know, long, slow distance and suddenly you start doing like, you know, 400 meters of speed work, you're going to have a bad time just from the joint stress and whatnot. So that kind of thing can ruin your season for sure.
So weightlifting falls under one of those things where you can double the volume of cycling the next day. If your longest ride ever has been 30 miles, you could do 60 miles the next day without problem. Whereas you could not do that with running. If you've only run, if you've done couch to 5K or whatever, and then the day after...
a week later after that 5K that you finally just were able to finish and someone's like, all right, now go jog 10K. Like you would feel terrible. Yeah. And if you didn't, your joints would probably feel terrible unless you're a freak of nature. I've known a couple of people like that who can just like get off the couch and run 12 miles. Um, but, uh, I am not that. And most people are not that either. So, um, anyway, yeah. So yeah, weightlifting is, uh, is a dangerous, uh, thing overall.
Yeah. I mean, it's not like the most, it's not, I don't know, base jumping or something. Especially for people who aren't super familiar with it, who don't lift year round, you can be introducing extra risk and it's fine. It's fine to be a little conservative and know that you're still getting a good workout. You're still getting good benefits. You don't have to push it. Because again, also for most people, it's November.
Like you're lifting now with the intention of doing well in races many months from now. So it's okay if you aren't going in and nailing every workout like it's a perfect 10 out of 10. Like I just crushed it every day. Like I think that's maybe a myth that people think that you have to just crush every workout all the time, which also goes in hand in hand with the like a hard workout is necessarily a good workout.
You don't have to obliterate, crush every workout all the time. It's actually probably not possible. Well, you can obliterate yourself, but I don't think at the point you're going to be obliterating any kind of workouts. I think most people who are fans of this podcast probably will.
Well-versed in our opinions in that regard. But actually, there's one more thing real quick. I know this has been another quote-unquote 10 minutes tips times, what, six now? Five and a bit? Closer to 10 every time. Yeah, closer to 10. The sets and reps for maintenance, I think, is probably a good thing to touch on right now.
So I would actually say that the medium rep range is really good for maintenance, not only for technique, but also because if you're just generally tired from your actual on-bike stuff and you want to do some maintenance in season, what I've done with people is every week or two doing some light, and by this I don't mean...
strength rep ranges or hypertrophy rep ranges where like 10 to 12 reps is like close to failure. You are not close to failure for these. But 10 to like 8 to 12, just call it 10, is actually really, really good for just maintenance from the technique point of view and from a neural point of view. And you get the rest of your recruiting large motor unit kind of stuff on the bike a lot of the time. Yeah. And also,
This may also be, like you said, only once a week. Right now, you might be lifting two times a week, probably not three times a week unless you're pretty much just lifting, but you're also going to cut down on your frequency as well. Yeah. All right. I think that's about all I've got. How about you? Yeah, I think that was good.
Pretty content. Unless, unless anyone wants to go out and we can do an Instagram 20 rep squat challenge after this. Kyle wins. I give up. I forfeit. I actually, I'm pretty sore today. I would go pretty badly right now. All right. I have a chance. No, I don't. I would get crushed literally. So maybe we could do, we could do something, something weird, like 20 rep, uh, 20 rep bicep curls. I think you're going to kill me in that too.
Actually, we might be pretty comparable in rows Okay, yeah I haven't been doing very much rowing Me neither Alright, this is going to go great Alright everybody, thanks for listening
What's my outro stuff? Yeah, subscribe to the podcast, blah, blah, blah, share it with a friend. Five stars on iTunes is awesome. We're ad-free, empiricalcycling.com slash donate. We're obviously not going to have any show notes today. If you have a coaching inquiry, consultation inquiry, like I said before in a previous episode, I'm not just doing strength training with people. I want full coaching clients, and same goes with all of my assistant coaches.
But if you want to do a consultation, we can talk about your strength training and et cetera, et cetera. So email me empiricalcycling at gmail.com. Also, if you want to coach, we all, all of our coaches do strength training integrated into coaching. So that's an option as well. So shoot me an email for that as well. If you have any questions or comments, again, get in touch, share the episode. And if you want to participate in the weekend AMAs on Instagram, that's at empiricalcycling.
And with that, we will see you in the next episode.